+++
title = "Linking Taxonomic, Phylogenetic and Functional Plant Diversity with Ecosystem Services of Cliffs and Screes in Greece"
date = "2021-05-17"
authors = ["K. Kougioumoutzis", "I. P. Kokkoris", "M. Panitsa", "A. Strid", "P. Dimopoulos"]
publication_types = ["2"]
publication = "Plants, 10(5), 992, https://doi.org/10.3390/plants10050992"
publication_short = "Plants, 10(5), 992, https://doi.org/10.3390/plants10050992"
abstract = "Sparsely vegetated habitats of cliffs and screes act as refugia for many regional and local endemic specialized plant taxa most of which have evolved precisely for that type of habitat. The interplay between taxonomic, phylogenetic, and functional plant diversity on rock and scree habitats of extreme environmental conditions, enlightens the relations of plant communities and ecosystems and facilitates management planning for the conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem services. The identification of biodiversity patterns and hotspots (taxonomic, phylogenetic, and functional) contributes to the integration of the ecosystem services (ES) approach for the mapping and assessment of ecosystems and their services (MAES) implementation in Greece and the creation of thematic maps based on the MAES reporting format. The overlap among the protected areas’ network revealed that almost all areas of cliffs and screes of medium, high, and very high taxonomic and phylogenetic plant endemism are included in the Natura 2000 area network. The results of this study provide the baseline information for ES assessments at sparsely vegetated land of cliffs and screes. Our results contribute to the implementation of certain indicators of the national set of MAES indicators in Greece such as (a) floristic diversity and (b) microrefugia of endemic diversity and support of decision-making."
abstract_short = ""
image_preview = ""
selected = true
projects = [""]
tags = ["biodiversity hotspots", "taxonomy", "phylogeny", "GIS analysis", "functional traits", "endemism", "chasmophyte", "sparsely vegetated land", "mountain flora", "MAES", "life-IP natura"]
url_pdf = "pdf/Cliffs.pdf"
url_preprint = ""
url_code = ""
url_dataset = ""
url_project = ""
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""
url_poster = ""
url_source = ""
math = true
highlight = true
[header]
image = "headers/Cliffs.png"
focal_point = "Smart"
+++
